# A (Exclam.)

### Situations
**S1:** When seeing his mother back home from the market, the child exclaims:
<pre>
A! Mẹ đã về!
(Oh! Mom is back!)
</pre>
In this situation, the child expresses his joy.

**S2:** Lan's husband usually comes home late on Saturday. But today he arrives home early. Lan says:
<pre>
A, hôm nay anh về sớm quá!
(Oh, you are home early today!)
</pre>
In this situation, Lan expresses her surprise.

**S3:** Nam made an appointment with Bình to return his money. At the coffee shop, they talked a lot. He didn't remember to return the money until he was about to leave. He said:
<pre>
A! Tôi quên, tôi chưa trả tiền cho anh.
(Oh! I forgot. I didn't return your money yet.)
</pre>
In this situation, **a** is used to indicate that the speaker remembers something.

### Definition
**A**, as an exclamatory word, is used at the beginning of the sentence to show joy, surprise, or to indicate that the speaker remembers something.

### Related Expressions
**A!** is an exclamatory sentence in **S1** and **S3**, and **a** used at the beginning of the sentence is an exclamatory word in **S2**.

Both **a** and **à**, used interchangeably, express that the speaker is surprised or just figures out something. However, **a** is not used to express joy.
<pre>
[1] — À, mẹ về!
(Yeah! Mom is back!)
</pre>

We use **thảo nào** / **hèn chi** / **hèn gì** to express surprise when we suddenly remember or realize something. But **thảo nào** is used to express a conclusion or new discovery about something. Cf:

Hoa tells Lan that Mrs. Ba has just won the lottery. Lan says:
<pre>
[2] Thảo nào dạo này trông bà ấy trẻ ra.
(That is why she looks younger these days.)
</pre>

Lan suddenly remembers that Mrs. Ba still owes her money. Lan asks:
<pre>
[3] À, chị có nghe bà ấy nói khi nào bà ấy trả tiền cho tôi không?
(Oh, did you hear her say when she will return my money?)
</pre>

### Combinations
**À, ra vậy!** (Cf. **thảo nào**), is used to express that we realize or understand something after hearing some news or an explanation. This expression is like a conclusion.

John speaks Vietnamese very well. Hà tells Nam that John's mother is Vietnamese. Nam says:
<pre>
[1] — À, ra vậy!
(Oh, now I understand!)
</pre>

**À** is also used in combination with **thảo nào** / **hèn chi** / **hèn gì** to express surprise and sudden understanding.
<pre>
[2] — À, thảo nào!
(Oh, that is why!)
</pre>