# Cái (Em)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam asked Hùng to get the mathematics book for him. Hùng didn't know which one. Nam said:
<pre>
Cái quyển sách ở trên bàn ấy.
(It is the book on the table.)
</pre>

**S2:** Hùng and Lan recall the first days when they started going to the university. Lan exclaims:
<pre>
Mình làm sao quên được cái ngày đầu tiên chúng mình vào đại học.
(How could I forget the very first days when we started going to university!)
</pre>
In both of the above situations, **cái** is used freely in front of noun phrases which have a restrictive / determinative attribute that aim to point out, bring up a thing which distinguishes it from the rest / remaining ones.

**S3:** Hùng and Lan are talking to each other about a classmate. Lan praises that person because he studies well and is intelligent. Hùng doesn't agree and says:
<pre>
Cái thằng ấy mà học giỏi gì!
(Someone like him couldn't study well!)
</pre>

**S4:** Mr. Hòa has a pet dog. This dog doesn't obey him. He says to his wife:
<pre>
Cái con chó này ngu lắm.
(This dog is so stupid.)
</pre>
In **S3** and **S4**, **cái** is used in front of nouns which refer to people or animals having distinctive attributes in order to express a despising or critical idea.

### Definition

**Cái**, as an emphasizer, is used in front of nouns which have restrictive / determinative attributes that aim to point out, bring up a thing which distinguishes it from the rest / remaining ones or expresses a despising or critical idea.

### Related Expressions

- **Cái1** and **cái2**:
Although it has the same origin as the classifying noun **cái1**, the emphasizer **cái2** differs from **cái1** in that **cái2** only has an emphatic function. It points out a certain thing but doesn't aim to individualize that thing, as does the classifying noun **cái1** and other unit nouns such as **con**, **quyển**, **chiếc**....

### Combinations

- **cái2 + classifying noun / substantive noun**:
**Cái2** can be placed in front of unit nouns such as **con**, **chiếc**, **tờ**, **bức**..., or in front of nouns that indicate materials / substances such as **nước** (water), **sắt** (iron), **đất** (earth)..., or in front of abstract nouns such as **ý kiến** (idea), **kết luận** (conclusion), **chính sách** (policy)....
