# Cho (Par)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam and Bình have been drinking coffee. Nam wants to pay the bill (for both of them). He said:
<pre>
Để tôi trả tiền cho.
(Let me pay the bill!)
</pre>
In this situation, Nam used **cho** to suggest that he will pay the bill and hopes that Bình will agree with him.

**S2:** It is time to pay the house rent, but Hà is still waiting for her salary. Hà entreated her hostess:
<pre>
Tôi chưa có lương. Xin chị thông cảm cho.
(I haven't received my salary yet. I beg your pardon.)
</pre>
In this situation, Hà hoped that the hostess would sympathize with her. So she used **cho**.

**S3:** When seeing Lan with a very short skirt, her mother said:
<pre>
Con mặc như thế người ta cười cho đấy!
(If you wear that, you will be laughed at!)
</pre>
In this situation, Lan's mother wanted to warn Lan (the listener) that a bad thing could happen to her.

**S4:** Nam drives too fast. Hà says:
<pre>
Đi chậm chậm thôi, cảnh sát phạt cho đây.
(Drive slowly or you will be fined.)
</pre>
In this situation, Hà warns Nam of a bad thing that may happen: being fined by the police.

### Definition

**Cho**, as a particle, is used to suggest or to express hope that the speaker wants to do something himself instead of the listener doing it (**S1**). It is also used to indicate an unfavorable consequence, caused by the listener himself, that may happen to him (**S3**, **S4**).

### Combinations

- **không X cho lắm**:
This construction is used to lighten a negative evaluation expressed by X. Cf:
<pre>
[1a] Phim này không hay.
(This film is not exciting.)
[1b] Phim này không hay cho lắm.
(This film is not so exciting.)
</pre>
This negative is lighter than in [1a].

### Notes

- **Cho2** is used in spoken language.
- **Cho** as used in **S3** and **S4** usually occurs after only some verbs like: **mắng**, **chửi**, **đánh**, **đập**, **giết**, **cười**... + **cho**.
