# Còn (V)

### Situations

**S1:** After the war, among Bình's friends, some live in Hà Nội, some in Huế, and some are dead. He says:
<pre>
Sau chiến tranh, bạn tôi kẻ còn người mất.
(After the war, of all my friends, some are still alive, others have died.)
</pre>

**S2:** After receiving his salary, Nam went to drink beer with his friend. Back home, he says to his wife:
<pre>
Xin lỗi, anh chỉ còn 100.000 đồng!
(I apologize. I have only 100,000 VND left.)
</pre>

### Definition

**Còn**, as a verb, expresses a state or action still in process (**S1**) or expresses a continuous state in which something is not yet finished (**S2**).

### Related Expressions

- **Có** is a verb that generally indicates the existence of a state or action. The difference between **có** and **còn** is that **có** does not imply continuation of a previous state or action.

- **Còn** is the opposite of **hết** (as a verb). **Còn hết** is the diminutive / shortened form of the construction **còn hay hết**.
<pre>
Tiền còn hết?
(Is any money left, or is it all gone?)
</pre>

- **nữa** indicates the continuation of a state or action, but it is an adverb placed after a verb.

### Combinations

- **... còn hết?** (**còn hay hết**)
<pre>
[1] Báo Tuổi Trẻ hôm nay còn hết?
    (Are any of today's "Tuổi Trẻ" newspapers left?)
</pre>

- **... còn lại ...**
<pre>
[2] Con cái đã đi làm xa, nhà chỉ còn lại hai vợ chồng già.
    (All the children are away at work; only this old couple remains at home.)
</pre>

- **còn nữa ...**
<pre>
[3] Anh ta gửi cái này cho chị. Còn nữa, anh ta nói sẽ gọi điện cho chị.
    (He gives you this. Another thing, he says that he will call you.)
[4] Tôi không còn tiền nữa.
    (I do not have money anymore.)
</pre>

- **ngoài (...) ra, còn ...**
<pre>
[5] Ngoài số tiền này ra, nó còn một số vàng rất lớn.
    (Besides this amount of money, he also has a great deal of gold.)
</pre>
Cf. **ngoài** (p. 283).
