# Còn (Adv)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam made an appointment with Lâm at 9 a.m. at his home. When Lâm arrived, Nam was sleeping.
<pre>
Khi Lâm đến, Nam còn ngủ.
(When Lâm arrived, Nam was still asleep.)
</pre>

**S2:** Nam tells Hà that Mrs. Mai is 50 years old, but Hà thinks that she looks as young as a 30-year-old woman. Hà says:
<pre>
Bà Mai trông còn trẻ.
(Mrs. Mai still looks young.)
</pre>

**S3:** Mrs. Mai has just opened a "phở" restaurant. After one month, there weren't many customers. She said hopefully:
<pre>
Khách còn ít, có lẽ vì người ta chưa biết. Không sao!
(There are as yet very few customers. Maybe people don't know about it yet. It doesn't matter!)
</pre>

### Definition

**Còn**, as an adverb, placed before a verb / adjective expresses continuation of an action, a state or a quality (that is not finished yet, or does not come up to standard / does not meet the requirements).

### Related Expressions

- **Còn**, **vẫn**, and **cứ**:
Cf:
<pre>
[1a] Đã 12 giờ đêm, anh ấy còn thức.
     (It's already midnight. He is still awake.)
[1b] Đã 12 giờ đêm, anh ấy vẫn thức.
     (It's already midnight. He is still awake.)
[1c] Đã 12 giờ đêm, anh ấy cứ thức.
     (It's already midnight. He keeps being awake.)
</pre>
All three of these sentences express continuation of the state "awake" (**thức**), but they imply different meanings:
- [1a] denotes only that he did not go to bed yet, that the state **thức** (awake) is in process and will end.
- In [1b], the state **thức** (awake) continues although it is already late (he should have gone to bed).
- In [1c], the state **thức** (awake) continues, and he is still awake without, for example, taking his doctor's advice.

**Còn** and **vẫn** can be interchangeably used. However, **còn** indicates the continuation of an action / state, whereas **vẫn** indicates the same state / action that is repeated despite a change in the circumstances.
Cf. **vẫn** (p. 396), **cứ** (p. 102).

### Combinations

- **còn (...) chưa / không ...**
<pre>
[1] Bà ấy còn chưa về.
    (She still hasn't returned.)
</pre>

- **vẫn còn ...**
<pre>
[2] Tôi vẫn còn yêu cô ấy.
    (I still love her.)
</pre>

- **còn (...) (thêm)... (nữa)**
(**Thêm** and **nữa** usually go together, but not necessarily.)
<pre>
[3] (Anh chưa đi à?)
    Chưa, tôi còn ở đây thêm ba ngày nữa.
    (Didn't you go yet? - Not yet. I am still here for three more days.)
</pre>

- **ngoài (...) còn ... / ngoài ra, còn ...**
<pre>
[4a] Ngoài uống bia, nó còn uống rượu (nữa).
     (Besides beer, he also drinks alcohol.)
[4b] Nó uống bia rất nhiều. Ngoài ra, nó còn uống rượu (nữa).
     (He drinks too much beer. Besides that, he also drinks alcohol.)
</pre>
