# Cứ (Adv)

### Situations

**S1:** Lan always goes to bed at 9 o'clock, whether in summer or winter, whether she is tired or fine.
<pre>
Cứ 9 giờ tối cô ấy đi ngủ.
(She goes to bed at 9 o'clock, as a rule.)
(Lit. Always at 9 o'clock, she goes to bed.)
</pre>
In this situation, 9 o'clock is always the definite point of time at which Lan goes to bed, and she does not change under any circumstance.

**S2:** Nam and Hà ride to Vũng Tàu by bicycle, leaving at 6 a.m. They intend to arrive in Vũng Tàu at 6 p.m. But after 2 hours, they had already gone 40 kilometers (a speed of 20 km/h). Nam says:
<pre>
Cứ tốc độ này, 12 giờ trưa chúng ta sẽ đến Vũng Tàu.
(Continuing at this speed, we will arrive at noon.)
</pre>
Ho Chi Minh City is 120 km from Vũng Tàu. At a speed of 20 km/h, Nam can be sure that it will take six hours to arrive in Vũng Tàu. In other words, the speed of 20 km/h is a condition that must be maintained in order for them to arrive in Vũng Tàu at noon. Complementary example:
<pre>
Anh cứ đi thẳng đường Nguyễn Huệ, anh sẽ thấy công ty Fahasa.
(Keep going straight on this street, and you will see Fahasa Co.)
</pre>
(You follow Nguyễn Huệ street + neither turn left nor turn right + don't worry + don't concern yourself about anything else.)

**S3:** It was raining, and Nam was ill. So Hà recommended that Nam not go to school, but Nam still went. Hà says:
<pre>
[1a] Tôi khuyên Nam nghỉ học, nhưng Nam cứ đi học.
     (I advised him to stay home, but Nam still went to school.)
[1b] Trời mưa mà Nam cứ đi học.
     (It was raining but Nam still went to school.)
[1c] Nam bị bệnh, nhưng Nam cứ đi học.
     (Nam was ill, but he still went to school.)
</pre>
In this situation, Nam went to school under unfavorable circumstances (it was raining, Nam was ill). But for Nam that doesn't matter.

**S4:** Nam came to the office to ask Mr. Thu about his salary. Mr. Thu invites him:
<pre>
Anh cứ ngồi! Cứ tự nhiên! Có gì cần anh cứ nói!
(Please sit down, make yourself at home, and don't hesitate to say what you want!)
</pre>
In this situation, the director Thu encourages Nam to speak, and not to be shy or worry. Complementary examples:
<pre>
[1] (Có tiếng gõ cửa) - Ai đó? - Cứ vào!... Anh cứ ngồi!
    (Someone knocks at the door. Who's that? - Please come in! Please sit down!)
    (Invitation.)
[2] Những em nào chưa hiểu cứ hỏi, đừng ngại gì cả!
    (Those who don't understand yet can go ahead and ask a question. Don't hesitate!)
    (Encouragement.)
[3] Ông không đồng ý à? Ông không đồng ý, tôi cũng cứ làm!
    (You don't agree? I will do it anyway!)
    (Defying someone.)
</pre>

### Definition

**Cứ**, as an adverb, is used to indicate a certain condition (an action or state) that, if met, will accomplish a particular result (regardless of any other factor) (**S1**, **S2**) or to express the continuation of an action or state under any circumstance (**S3**). **Cứ** is also used to invite (friendly), to give an order, to propose, to encourage or to defy (**S4**).

### Related Expressions

- **Cứ** and **hễ**:
Cf.
<pre>
[1a] Cứ 9 giờ là tôi đi ngủ.
     (Always at 9 o'clock I go to bed regardless of other factors.)
[1b] Hễ 9 giờ là tôi đi ngủ.
     (Always at 9 o'clock I go to bed. It is a habit but sometimes there are exceptions.)
</pre>
**Hễ** also expresses the absolute relationship (cause-effect), but it does not imply an action regardless of other factors.

- **Cứ** and **vẫn**:
Cf:
<pre>
[2a] Nam bị ho, bác sĩ cấm Nam hút thuốc, nhưng Nam cứ hút.
     (Nam has a cough. The doctor prohibits him from smoking, but Nam smokes anyway.)
[2b] Bác sĩ cấm hút thuốc, nhưng Nam vẫn hút.
[2c] Nam bị ho nhưng Nam vẫn hút thuốc.
</pre>
In [2a], Nam continues to smoke in spite of the advice of the doctor. In [2b] and [2c], Nam keeps smoking although this action is not good for his health. **Vẫn** expresses the idea of continuation without any change, but it also implies regardless of any situation, the same as **cứ** in [2a].
Cf. **vẫn** (p. 397).

### Combinations

- **cứ... là ...**:
Expresses an absolute cause-effect relationship.
<pre>
[1] Cứ trời mưa là con đường này ngập nước.
    (Whenever it rains, this road gets flooded.)
</pre>
Besides expressing an absolute cause-effect relationship, **cứ... là...** can be used to express habit or repetition.
<pre>
[2] Cứ có tiền là nó uống rượu.
    (Whenever he has money, he drinks alcohol.)
</pre>

- **cứ ngày ngày / chiều chiều / đêm đêm**:
Every day / afternoon / night.
<pre>
[3] Cứ chiều chiều cô ấy lại ra cửa chờ chồng về.
    (Every afternoon, she stands at the door waiting for her husband.)
</pre>

- **... vẫn cứ ... / cứ ... vẫn ...**:
<pre>
[4] Tôi khuyên Nam nghỉ học, Nam vẫn cứ đi học.
    (I advised Nam to take off from school; Nam goes anyway.)
</pre>

- **nhưng / mà (...) vẫn cứ ...**:
<pre>
[5] Tôi đã nói rồi mà cô ấy vẫn cứ không nghe.
    (I told her, but she would not listen to me.)
</pre>
    Cf. **vẫn** (p. 397).
