# Đã (Adv)

### Situations

**S1:** Hoa saw a beautiful hat. She wanted to buy it. Her husband said:
<pre>
Mũ à? Tuần trước em đã mua một cái rồi mà!
(A hat? You bought one last week!)
</pre>
In this situation, **đã** is used to indicate that the action **mua** (buy / bought) is completed.

**S2:** Mr. Năm had been a driver. This year he is 80 years old and cannot drive anymore.
<pre>
Ông Năm đã già, không lái xe được nữa.
(Mr. Năm is already old and cannot drive anymore.)
</pre>
**Đã** here indicates that the state of being **già** (old) exists from before the time of speaking, and the fact is that Mr. Năm is now an old man.

**S3:** John is going back to his homeland. He is very homesick, he says:
<pre>
Giờ này tuần sau tôi đã ở nhà rồi.
(I will have arrived home by this time next week.)
</pre>
**Đã** here indicates the event which is completed before the point of "by this time next week".

### Definition

**Đã**, as an adverb, is used to indicate what happened before a certain point of time. (Normally, this point of time, if not marked by a specific time, will be considered as the present time.)

### Related Expressions

- **Đã** and **rồi**:
**Đã**, **rồi** both indicate an event, a state or an action that is completed before a certain point of time. They can be used interchangeably or as a combination **đã ... rồi**. However, their meaning is different:
  - **Rồi** is used to emphasize the completion of an event that seems farther away in the past.
  - Cf:
<pre>
[1a] Ăn cơm chưa? - Ăn rồi.
     (Have you eaten? - I have.)
     (The action of eating came to an end.)
[1b] Ăn cơm chưa? - Đã ăn.
     (Did you eat? - I did.)
     (The action of eating is done.)
</pre>
  - **Rồi** usually goes with certain adjectives (**đẹp**, **ốm**, **già**, **ngon**...) to indicate a quality or state.
  - Cf:
<pre>
[2a] Nấu như thế này ngon rồi.
     (Cooking like this is tasty already.)
[2b] *Nấu như thế này đã ngon.
</pre>
  - **Đã** can also be combined with these adjectives, but this way of speaking expresses a different meaning from the construction **adjective + rồi**:
  - Cf:
<pre>
[3a] Nấu như thế này, đối với tôi đã là ngon lắm!
     (Cooking like this, according to me, is very good!)
     (No further additions or requirements.)
[3b] Nấu như thế này, đối với tôi là ngon lắm rồi!
     (Cooking like this, according to me, is very good!)
     (The requirements are satisfied.)
</pre>
Cf. **rồi1** (p. 327).

- **Đã**, **đang**:
Because **đã** expresses the reality of the event, in many cases it can be replaced with **đang**.
Cf:
<pre>
[4a] Bây giờ đang là mùa mưa.
     (It is now the rainy season.)
[4b] Bây giờ đã là mùa mưa.
     (It is already the rainy season.)
</pre>
Cf. **đang** (p. 119).

### Combinations

- **đã (...) còn (...)**:
<pre>
[1] Bà ấy đã già, lại còn hay bệnh nữa.
    (She is already old and, furthermore, she often falls sick.)
</pre>

- **đã ... lại càng ...**:
<pre>
[2] Trời đã mưa, lại càng lạnh thêm.
    (It was already raining and, moreover, it became even colder.)
</pre>

- **chưa ... đã ...**:
<pre>
[3] Anh ta chưa học đã muốn đi làm.
    (He hasn't studied yet but already wants to work.)
</pre>

- **... đã ... lại ...**:
<pre>
[4] Nó đã nghèo, lại còn lười nữa.
    (He is already poor and, furthermore, he is lazy too.)
</pre>

- **... xong (...) đã**:
Done / finished ... first.
<pre>
[5] Ăn xong đã rồi hãy nói chuyện.
    (Finish your dinner first, then talk later.)
</pre>
The particle **đã** here is placed at the end of the first clause to indicate the requirement that the first action must be done before the following action starts.

### Notes

- In the Vietnamese language, **đã** is not used to express past time (tense). Therefore, it is necessary to choose carefully when to use (or not to use) **đã** when translating from Vietnamese to English or vice-versa.
Cf:
<pre>
[5a] Anh khỏe không? - Cảm ơn, tôi khỏe.
     (How are you? - Thanks, I'm fine.)
[5b] Anh đã khỏe chưa? - Cảm ơn, tôi đã khỏe.
     (Are you feeling better? - Thanks, I feel better.)
</pre>
(Before I was not well, but now I am no longer ill.)

<pre>
[6a] Ông ấy là giám đốc.
     (He is a director.)
[6b] Ông ấy đã là giám đốc.
     (He became (and now is) a director.)
</pre>

- To determine time, we often use words indicating time like **hôm qua** (yesterday), **tuần trước** (last week)... (especially when the context is not clear) without using **đã**. Cf:
<pre>
[7a] Tối hôm qua, tôi đã gọi cho cô ấy.
     (I did call her yesterday evening.)
[7b] Tối hôm qua tôi gọi cho cô ấy.
     (I called her yesterday evening.)
[7c] (Anh gọi cho cô ấy chưa?) - Tôi đã gọi, nhưng không có ai trả lời.
     ((Did you call her yet?) - Yes, I did, but nobody answered.)
</pre>

**Đã** is used to indicate the reality / status quo, while the words indicating time cannot be substituted for **đã**. In many situations, **đã** cannot be exchanged for time words (for example, when **đã** is followed by a verb indicating a state or quality). Cf:
<pre>
[8a] Tôi đã yêu anh ấy.
     (I have been / am in love with him.)
[8b] Tháng trước tôi yêu anh ấy.
     (I loved him last month.)
[9a] Bố tôi đã yếu lắm.
     (My father has been / is very weak.)
[9b] Năm ngoái bố tôi yếu lắm.
     (Last year, my father was very weak.)
</pre>
