# Đây (De Pro)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam introduces Mr. Johnson to his classmates:
<pre>
Đây là ông Johnson, người Mỹ.
(This is Mr. Johnson, an American.)
</pre>
**Đây**, a demonstrative pronoun, is used to show that the person or thing mentioned is near the speaker and the listener.

**S2:** Nam entered a pub. Seeing an empty chair, he asked a person who was sitting nearby:
<pre>
Tôi ngồi đây có được không ạ?
(Is it alright if I sit here?)
</pre>
In this situation, **đây** is used to indicate a place near both the speaker and the listener.

**S3:** Nam bought a ticket to go to Nha Trang. The salesperson handed him the ticket and said:
<pre>
Vé của anh đây!
(Here's your ticket!) (Lit. Your ticket is here!)
</pre>
**Đây** in this situation is placed at the end of the sentence and is used to indicate close proximity when the speaker gives / points out something to another person. It can be understood as a syntactic-reversed case. In the sentence "**Đây là vé của anh**", the speaker focuses on the position **đây** (here), not **kia** (there). It can be analyzed as "**vé của anh**" (your ticket) is the topic, and **đây** (here) is the comment / explanation.

**S4:** Tài put a jar of perfume in his pocket. His wife saw it and asked:
<pre>
Cái gì đây?
(What's this?)
</pre>
Like in **S3**, we can understand "**Cái gì đây?**" as a syntactic-reversed case of the sentence "**Đây là cái gì?**". This is similar to interrogative questions which have the Wh-question at the beginning of the sentence such as: "**Ai đây?**" (Who's there?), "**Bao nhiêu lâu?**" (How long?), "**Con gì kia?**" (What's that animal?).

### Definition

**Đây**, as a demonstrative pronoun, is used to show that a person / thing / place (which the speaker mentioned) is near both the speaker and the listener.

### Related Expressions

- **Đây** is one of the demonstrative pronouns: **đây**, **đó**, **kia**, **đấy**, **ấy**.
Cf. **đấy1** (p. 131), **kia1** (p. 161), **ấy1** (p. 11).

The relationship between the speaker, the listener, and the thing which is mentioned is expressed by using the following pronouns:

| Position | Speaker Near | Speaker Far | Listener Near | Listener Far |
| :--- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **đây** | + | | + | |
| **đấy / đó** | | + | + | (+) |
| **kia / ấy** | | | | + |

- **đây** and **này**:
Both **đây** and **này** as pronouns indicate a thing which is near the speaker and the listener. However, **này** can be used as a subject only when making a list, although this function is seldom used. Cf:
<pre>
[1] Này / Đây là chị ruột, này / đây là em dâu.
    (This is my blood elder sister, and this is my sister-in-law.)
[2a] Tôi đã từng sống ở đây / *này ba năm.
     (I lived here for three years.)
[2b] Tôi đã từng sống ở nơi này ba năm.
     (I lived at this place for three years.)
[3] Xin giới thiệu với các bạn, đây / *này là anh John.
    (I'd like to introduce to you, here is Mr. John.)
</pre>
Cf. **này2** (p. 271).
