# Ấy (De. Pro.)

### Situations

**S1:** Lan, pointing at a young lady standing at the door, asked Nam: "Who is that?", Nam answered:

<pre>
Ấy là cô thư ký mới.
(That is the new secretary.)
</pre>

**Ấy** here is a pronoun indicating a person at a distance from both speaker and listener.

**S2:** Hung's mother punished him because he was lazy in schoolwork. After punishment, she said:

<pre>
Ấy là mẹ muốn con chăm chỉ hơn.
(That is because I want you to be more studious.)
</pre>

The pronoun **ấy** refers to the mother's punishment.

### Definition

**Ấy**, as a demonstrative pronoun, is used to refer to a person or thing far from both speaker and listener, or to refer to something which has just been mentioned.

As a subject, the pronoun **ấy** occurs only at the beginning of the sentence and goes only with the copula **là**. Note that **ấy** cannot be used as an object.

### Related Expressions

In fact, **ấy** is not often used as a subject, but **đó** / **đấy** are used instead to indicate a person or thing which is far from the speaker and the listener, or which has just been mentioned.

<pre>
[1] — Ấy / Đó / Đấy là tôi muốn giúp anh.
(It is that I want to help you.)
</pre>

**Đó** / **đấy** can occur as a complement of place, but **ấy** cannot.

<pre>
[2] — Tôi đã sống ở đấy / đó / *ấy 10 năm.
(I had been living there for 10 years.)
</pre>

Note: **Đó** is often used in the Southern dialect.

The pronouns **đây**, **này** refer to a person or thing close to both the speaker and the listener. Cf:

<pre>
[3a] — Ấy là em gái tôi.
(That is my younger sister.)

[3b] — Đây là em gái tôi.
(This is my younger sister.)

[3c] — Này là chị ruột, này là em dâu.
(This is my blood elder sister, and this is my sister-in-law.)
</pre>

Note: The pronoun **này** is rarely used as a subject of the sentence.
