# Kia (De Pro)

### Situations

**S1:** Mai pointed to a man walking on the street and asked Lan:
<pre>
Kia là ai?
(Who is that?)
</pre>
In this situation, **kia** is a demonstrative pronoun used to indicate people or things that can be seen but are far from both the speaker and listener(s).

**S2:** Mai saw a crowd in front of her. Mai asked her friend:
<pre>
Ở kia có chuyện gì thế?
(What's happening over there?)
</pre>
In this situation, **kia** is a pronoun which indicates a place that can be seen, but is far from the speaker and listener(s).

### Definition

**Kia**, as a demonstrative pronoun, is used to refer to people / things / places that can be seen but are far from both the speaker and listener(s).

### Related Expressions

- **Kia** belongs to the demonstrative pronoun group: **đây**, **này**, **đấy**, **đó**, **ấy**.
Cf. **ấy1** (p. 11), **đây1** (p. 123), **đấy1** (p. 131).

- **kia** and **ấy** / **đấy** / **đó**:
**Kia** differs from **ấy** / **đấy** / **đó** in that **kia** is used to refer to people / things that are far from the speaker and listener(s) but can be seen, while **ấy** / **đấy** / **đó** is used to refer to people / things in a sphere that may or may not be seen. Cf:
<pre>
[1a] Kia là con gì?
     (What animal is over there?) (Far from both speaker and listener, but can be seen.)
[1b] Ấy là con gì?
     (What animal is that?) (Far from both speaker and listener, but can be seen.)
[1c] Đấy là con gì?
     (What animal is that?) (Far from both speaker and listener, but can be seen.)
[1d] Đó là con gì?
     (What animal is that?) (Far from speaker but near listener, but can be seen.)
</pre>
In the above sentences, the animal mentioned is far from both the speaker and listener, but can be seen. Therefore, the words **kia**, **ấy**, **đấy**, **đó** may be interchanged.

<pre>
[2] Nghe nói Nam có nhà ở Đà Lạt. *Kia / Ấy / Đấy là nhà riêng của Nam à?
    (I heard that Nam has a house in Đà Lạt. Is that his own house?)
</pre>
In sentence [2], Nam's house was mentioned but cannot be seen; therefore, we cannot use **kia** to refer to Nam's house.
