# Là (Par)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam asks Lan about the film that she saw last week. Lan answers:
<pre>
Phim đó rất là hay. Em rất là thích.
(That film was interesting. I liked it very much.)
</pre>

### Definition

**Là**, as a particle, is used to stress a subjective assertion of an utterance.

### Related Expressions

- **là** (linking verb) and **là** (particle):
Although **là** (particle) originated from **là** (linking verb), it has a different function and meaning.
**Là** (linking verb) is usually used to link two parts of a sentence to express a relationship about the characteristics, origin, quantity, etc. Whereas **là** (particle) is used to express a subjective assertion of an utterance according to the speaker's judgment. Cf:
<pre>
- Cô ấy là sinh viên.
  (She is a student.) (Copula linking 'Cô ấy' with 'sinh viên'.)
- Cô ấy rất là thông minh.
  (She is very intelligent.) (Particle used to emphasize 'thông minh'.)
</pre>

### Combinations

- **Là** can be combined with words that express intensity in order to strongly assert something (carrying the subjective nuance of the speaker).
<pre>
[1] Cô ấy rất là thông minh.
    (She is very intelligent.)
[2] Cô ấy thật là thông minh.
    (She is very intelligent.)
[3] Cô ấy khá là thông minh.
    (She is rather intelligent.)
</pre>
Apart from that, there are also **cực kỳ là**, **vô cùng là**, **hết sức là**, **hoàn toàn là**...

- **có là mấy** (= bao nhiêu) / **không là mấy**: Combinations that create the nuance of a subjective evaluation according to the speaker.
<pre>
[4] Nghỉ ba ngày thì có là mấy!
    (Only three days off!) (Seen as little.)
[5] Đối với cô, 3 triệu không là mấy.
    (For her, 3 million đồng is not very much.) (Seen as little.)
</pre>

- **X ơi là X**: Used to connect the feelings of the speaker (this expression is usually used only by women or children) about the high level of X.
<pre>
[6] Cô ấy đẹp ơi là đẹp.
    (She is so beautiful.)
[7] Bữa tiệc chiều hôm qua vui ơi là vui.
    (The party yesterday afternoon was so much fun.)
</pre>
