# Lại (Adv 1)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam got a letter from his girlfriend. He read it, and now he is reading it a second time.
<pre>
Nam đọc lại thư của bạn gái.
(Nam reads his girlfriend's letter again.)
</pre>
In this situation, **lại** is used after the verb to express the idea that both the action and the object are repeated one more time.

**S2:** Nam finished writing to Lan. Nam had a meal. Then Nam wrote a letter to Thu.
<pre>
Sau khi ăn cơm xong, Nam lại viết thư.
(After having a meal, Nam resumed writing another letter.)
</pre>
In this situation, **lại** is used before the verb to indicate an action which is carried out one more time, but it doesn't absolutely have to be the same object.

**S3:** Nam read his girlfriend's letter a second time. And now he is reading it a third time.
<pre>
Nam lại đọc lại thư của bạn gái.
(Nam read and reread his girlfriend's letter.)
</pre>
In this situation, **lại** is used both before and after the verb to indicate carrying out an action once more with the same object.

**S4:** The company works from 8 o'clock to 12 o'clock. From 12 o'clock to 1 o'clock is lunch time.
<pre>
Buổi chiều, công ty làm việc lại lúc 13 giờ.
(In the afternoon, the company resumes working at 1 o'clock.)
</pre>
In **S3** and **S4**, **lại** is used to express the resumption of an action after a period of time in which the action had been interrupted.

### Definition

**Lại**, as an adverb, indicates the resumption or continuation of an action or state.

### Related Expressions

- **lại** and **nữa**:
    - **Cô hát lại đi.** (Sing again, please.) (Sing that song one more time.)
    - **Cô hát nữa đi.** (Keep on singing, please.)
    - **Cô ấy lại hát.** (She sings again and again.) (Singing many times.)
**Lại** indicates an action which is carried out once more, and **nữa** indicates an action / state which is continued.

### Combinations

- **lại... nữa**:
<pre>
[1] Trời nóng quá. Tắm xong, Nam lại tắm nữa.
    (It's so hot! After bathing, Nam takes another bath.)
</pre>

- **... đi... lại**: Do over again and again.
<pre>
[2] Sửa đi sửa lại mấy lần Tân mới hài lòng về bài viết của mình.
    (Tân corrected his composition over and over until he was satisfied with it.)
</pre>

- **hễ... lại...**: Whenever... again.
<pre>
[3] Nó nghiện rượu, hễ có tiền nó lại đi uống rượu.
    (He is addicted to alcohol. Whenever he has some money, he goes to drink alcohol again.)
</pre>
