# Mà (Conj 1)

### Situations

**S1:** Nam worked very hard, but in the end, he did not succeed.
<pre>
Nam làm việc chăm chỉ mà không có kết quả gì cả.
(Nam tried hard but without any success in the end.)
</pre>
Logically, if someone worked hard, he would be successful. However, this did not come true in Nam's case. **Mà** is used to express a reality contrary to the logic of the situation.

**S2:** Nam thought *Titanic* was a very good movie, but Lan disagreed. She said:
<pre>
Phim Titanic mà hay à?
((You thought) that film was good, did you?)
</pre>
In this case, **mà** is used in a question form that does not demand a response. It is used to deny one idea and perhaps affirm another, contrasting idea.

### Definition

**Mà**, as a conjunction, is used to express a reality contrary to the logical situation or to deny what has been suggested or supposed.

### Related Expressions

- **Mà**, as used in **S1**, can be replaced with **nhưng**, **song**, or combinations such as **nhưng mà**, **vậy mà**, **mà lại**. However, **mà** refers to an event contrary to what is usually expected, while **nhưng** expresses a contrary relationship between cause and effect.

- **Mà**, as used in **S2**, can only be replaced with **mà lại**, which is used to make a denial.
Cf. **lại3** (p. 140/183).

### Combinations

- **nhưng mà**: Usually used in spoken Vietnamese to emphasize a contrary relationship or contrast.
<pre>
[1] Tôi đã đọc quyển sách ấy rồi nhưng mà không hiểu gì cả.
    (I read that book, but I didn't understand anything from it.)
[2] Cô ấy rất thông minh nhưng mà hơi tự kiêu.
    (She is very intelligent, but she is a little arrogant.)
</pre>

- **mà lại**:
<pre>
[3] Tôi mà lại nói dối à?
    (I lied? No way!) (Denial)
</pre>

- **vậy mà** / **thế mà**:
<pre>
[4] Tôi đã khuyên nó, vậy mà nó không nghe!
    (I gave him some advice, but he didn't take it.)
</pre>
