# Cả (Adj.)

### Situations

**S1:** Tomorrow, Mầm Non school will go to Vũng Tàu, everybody will go.
<pre>
Ngày mai, cả trường đi Vũng Tàu.
(Tomorrow, the whole school will go to Vũng Tàu.)
</pre>
In this situation, **trường** is considered as a unit (though it is a group of many parts, like teachers, schoolchildren, office employees). So it can go with the adjective **cả**.

**S2:** Bình was on the street when it suddenly rained. He was wet from head to toe.
<pre>
Bình bị ướt cả người.
(Bình is all wet / soaked all over / wet to the skin.)
</pre>
**Người** here is considered as a unit (the body), so it can be combined with **cả**.

### Definition

**Cả**, as an adjective, is placed before unit nouns (such as **chiếc**, **quyển**, **nước**, **tỉnh**, etc.) to indicate the whole of the unit.

### Related Expressions

- **Cả** and **tất cả** are both used to indicate the whole of a unit / a group, but they have different nuances.
Cf. **tất cả** (p. 355).

- **Cả** and **toàn**:
**Toàn** is also used to indicate all of the parts of a group. Furthermore, **toàn** means of the same nature, not a mixture of different kinds of things. **Toàn** and **cả** can be interchanged in some situations but not all. Cf:
<pre>
[1] Toàn / Cả khu vực này bị cúp điện.
(There is no electricity in this whole area.)
[2] Cả / *Toàn nhà nó bị ngộ độc thức ăn.
(His whole family got food poisoning.)
</pre>
Cf. **toàn** (p. 377).

- **Toàn bộ**, **toàn thể**, etc. also used to indicate all of the parts, all of the members of a group; but when they are combined with nouns, they imply a subtle difference: **cả** can go only with unit nouns, whereas **toàn bộ** can go not only with unit nouns but also with nouns of general meaning, such as **cuộc đời** (life), **quyển sách** (book)....

- **Toàn thể** goes with unit nouns of at least two syllables (usually referring to people) such as **giáo viên**, **bác sĩ**, **dân tộc**. Cf:
<pre>
[3] Cả / *Toàn bộ / *Toàn thể nhà đi vắng.
(The whole family is out.)
</pre>
(**Nhà**, a monosyllabic word, here is considered as one unit.)
<pre>
[4] Cả / Toàn thể / Toàn bộ công ty được nghỉ 3 ngày.
(The whole company has a three-day holiday.)
</pre>
(**Công ty** is understood as one unit or one group.)
<pre>
[5] Tôi đã đọc cả / toàn bộ / *toàn thể quyển sách ấy rồi.
(I read that whole book.)
</pre>
(**Quyển sách** is a noun phrase that consists of two syllables, in which **quyển** is a unit noun.)
